docs: Consul at scale guide (#15890)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/architecture/scale.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Recommendations for operating Consul at scale
description: >-  
  When using Consul for large scale deployments, you can ensure network resilience by tailoring your network to your needs. Learn more about HashiCorp's recommendations for deploying Consul at scale.
---

# Operating Consul at Scale

This page describes how Consul's architecture and impact its performance with large scale deployments, and shares recommendations for operating Consul in production at scale.

## Overview

> Consul is a distributed service networking system deployed as a centralized set of servers that coordinate network activity using sidecars that are located alongside user workloads. When Consul is used for its service mesh capabilities, servers also generate configurations for Envoy proxies that run alongside service instances. These proxies support service mesh capabilities like end-to-end TLS and progressive deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consul is a distributed service networking system deployed as a centralized set of servers that coordinate network activity using sidecars that are located alongside user workloads. When Consul is used for its service mesh capabilities, servers also generate configurations for Envoy proxies that run alongside service instances. These proxies support service mesh capabilities like end-to-end mTLS and progressive deployments.
```

> Consul is a distributed service networking system deployed as a centralized set of servers that coordinate network activity using sidecars that are located alongside user workloads. When Consul is used for its service mesh capabilities, servers also generate configurations for Envoy proxies that run alongside service instances. These proxies support service mesh capabilities like end-to-end TLS and progressive deployments.

Reviewer 2: Just noticed that we don't introduce the term data plane and control plane anywhere, can we write one sentence here about each since further below we have a section titled data plane resiliency

> Consul can be deployed in either a single datacenter or across multiple datacenters by establishing WAN federation or peering connections. In this context, a datacenter refers to a named environment whose hosts can communicate with low networking latency. Typically, users map a Consul datacenter to a cloud provider region such as AWS us-east-1 or Azure East US.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consul can be deployed in either a single datacenter or across multiple datacenters by establishing WAN federation or peering connections. In this context, a datacenter refers to a named environment whose hosts can communicate with low networking latency. Typically, users map a Consul datacenter to a cloud provider region such as AWS `us-east-1` or Azure `East US`.
```

> To ensure consistency and high availability, Consul servers share data using the [Raft consensus protocol](/consul/docs/architecture/consensus). When persisting data, Consul uses Boltdb to store Raft logs and a custom file format for state snapshots. For more information, refer to [Consul architecture](/consul/docs/architecture).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure consistency and high availability, Consul servers share data using the [Raft consensus protocol](/consul/docs/architecture/consensus). When persisting data, Consul uses BoltDB to store Raft logs and a custom file format for state snapshots. For more information, refer to [Consul architecture](/consul/docs/architecture).
```

## General deployment recommendations

This section provides general configuration and monitoring recommendations for operating Consul at scale.

### Data plane resiliency

To make service-to-service communication resilient against outages and failures, we recommend spreading multiple service instances for a service across fault domains:

- Spread service instances across _multiple infrastructure-level availability zones_.
- Spread service instances across _multiple runtime platform instances_, such as multiple Kubernetes clusters.

> - Spread service instances across _multiple Consul datacenters_.

Reviewer: could we condense/remove "spread service instances across"? it seems repetitive, esp when we introduce this with "we recommend spreading multiple service instances..."

Service failover across Consul datacenters must be configured in the datacenters before you can use it. Use one of the following methods to configure failover across datacenters:

- **If you are using Consul service mesh**: Implement failover using [service-resolver configuration entries](/consul/docs/connect/config-entries/service-resolver#failover).
- **If you are using Consul service discovery without service mesh**: Implement [geo-redundant failover using prepared queries](consul/tutorials/developer-discovery/automate-geo-failover).

### Control plane resiliency

When a large number services are deployed to a single datacenter, the Consul servers may experience slower network performance. To make the control plane more resilient against slowdowns and outages, limit the size of individual datacenters by spreading deployments across availability zones, runtimes, and datacenters.

#### Datacenter size

> To ensure resiliency, we recommend limiting deployments to a maximum of 5,000 Consul client agents per Consul datacenter. There are two reasons for this recommendation:

Reviewer: should we mention that this doesn't apply to agentless or can that be assumed? @jkirschner-hashicorp

Reviewer: this [blog post](https://www.hashicorp.com/blog/consul-scale-test-report-to-observe-gossip-stability) seems like a great resource to link to from this section -- it talks about Consul scale and gossip stability

it maps performance to actual Consul metrics which is helpful

Reviewer 3: The blog post should go in the "agent gossip management" section.

Maybe something like "Refer to the report on gossip stability at scale for more details."

Reviewer 3: I don't want to assume it's common knowledge externally (especially just after `consul-dataplane`'s initial release on k8s) what the distinction is between Consul client agents and `consul-dataplane`.

I do feel like this is a general problem anywhere in our docs we talk about client agents. I have ideas on that which I can follow up with you on separately...

## Consul server deployment recommendations

Consul server agents are an important part of Consul’s architecture. This section summarizes the differences between running managed and self-managed servers, as well as recommendations on the number of servers to run, how to deploy servers across redundancy zones, hardware requirements, and cloud provider integrations.

### Consul server runtimes

Consul servers can be deployed on a few different runtimes:

- **HashiCorp Cloud Platform (HCP) Consul (Managed)**. These Consul servers are deployed in a hosted environment managed by HCP. To get started with HCP Consul servers in Kubernetes or VM deployments, refer to the Deploy HCP Consul tutorial. 
- **VMs or bare metal servers (Self-managed)**. To get started with Consul on VMs or bare metal servers, refer to the Deploy Consul server tutorial.For a full list of configuration options, refer to Agents Overview.
- **Kubernetes (Self-managed)**. To get started with Consul on Kubernetes, refer to the Deploy Consul on Kubernetes tutorial.
- **Other container environments, including Docker, Rancher, and Mesos (Self-managed)**.

> When operating Consul at scale, self-managed VM or bare metal server deployments  offer the most flexibility. Some Consul Enterprise features that can enhance fault tolerance and read scalability, such as [redundancy zones](/consul/docs/enterprise/redundancy) and [read replicas](/consul/docs/enterprise/read-scale), are not available to server agents on Kubernetes runtimes. To learn more, refer to [Consul Enterprise feature availability by runtime](/consul/docs/enterprise#feature-availability-by-runtime).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When operating Consul at scale, self-managed VM or bare metal server deployments offer the most flexibility. Some Consul Enterprise features that can enhance fault tolerance and read scalability, such as [redundancy zones](/consul/docs/enterprise/redundancy) and [read replicas](/consul/docs/enterprise/read-scale), are not available to server agents on Kubernetes runtimes. To learn more, refer to [Consul Enterprise feature availability by runtime](/consul/docs/enterprise#feature-availability-by-runtime).
```

### Number of Consul servers

Determining the number of Consul servers to deploy on your network has two key considerations:

> - **Fault tolerance**: The number of server outages your deployment can tolerate while maintaining quorum. Additional servers increase a network’s fault tolerance.
> - **Performance scalability**: To handle more requests, additional servers produce latency and slow the quorum process. Too many servers impedes your network instead of helping it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Fault tolerance**: The number of server outages your deployment can tolerate while maintaining quorum. Additional servers increase a network’s fault tolerance.
1. **Performance scalability**: To handle more requests, additional servers produce latency and slow the quorum process. Too many servers impedes your network instead of helping it.
```

- **With redundancy zones**: Deploy 6 Consul servers across 3 availability zones. This deployment provides the performance of a 3 server deployment with the fault tolerance of  a 7 server deployment.
- **Without redundancy zones**: Deploy 5 Consul servers across 3 availability zones. All 5 servers should be voting servers, not [read replicas](/consul/docs/enterprise/read-scale).

For more details, refer to [Improving Consul Resilience](/consul/docs/architecture/improving-consul-resilience).

### Server requirements

To ensure your server nodes are a sufficient size, we recommend reviewing [hardware sizing for Consul servers](/consul/tutorials/production-deploy/reference-architecture#hardware-sizing-for-consul-servers). If your network needs to handle heavy workloads, refer to our recommendations in [read-heavy workload sources and solutions](#read-heavy-workload-sources-and-solutions) and [write-heavy workload sources and solutions](#write-heavy-workload-sources-and-solutions).

#### File descriptors

> Consul's agents use network sockets for gossip communication with the other nodes and agents. As a result, servers create file descriptors for connections from clients, connections from other servers, watch handlers, health checks, and log files. For write-heavy clusters, you must increase the size limit for the number of file descriptions from the default value, 1024. We recommend using a number that is two times higher than your expected number of clients in the cluster.

Reviewer: what's the mapping between the value and the expected number of clients -- is it two to one?

if i am expecting 1024 number of clients, should the number of file descriptions be 2048?

#### Auto scaling groups

Auto scaling groups (ASGs) are infrastructure associations in cloud providers used to ensure a specific number of replicas are available for a deployment. When using ASGs for Consul servers, there are specific requirements and processes for bootstrapping Raft and maintaining quorum.

> We recommend using the [`bootstrap-expect` command-line flag](/consul/docs/agent/config/cli-flags#_bootstrap_expect) during cluster creation, but when spawning new servers to add to a cluster or upgrading servers, do not configure them to automatically bootstrap. If `bootstrap-expect` is set on these replicas, it is possible for them to create a separate Raft system, which causes a _split brain_ and leads to errors and general cluster instability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend using the [`bootstrap-expect` command-line flag](/consul/docs/agent/config/cli-flags#_bootstrap_expect) during cluster creation. However if you are spawning new servers to add to a cluster or upgrading servers, do not configure them to automatically bootstrap. If `bootstrap-expect` is set on these replicas, it is possible for them to create a separate Raft system, which causes a _split brain_ and leads to errors and general cluster instability.
```

Some cloud providers offer extremely large instance sizes with Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) architectures.  Because the Go runtime is not NUMA aware, Consul is not NUMA aware.

### Consistency modes

Consul offers different [consistency modes](/consul/api-docs/features/consistency#stale) for both its DNS and HTTP APIs.

#### DNS

> We strongly recommend utilizing the recommendations in the [DNS Caching tutorial](/consul/tutorials/networking/dns-caching) for stale consistency. Consul uses [stale consistency mode](/consul/api-docs/features/consistency#stale) to optimize for performance over consistency in DNS API responses.

Reviewer 3: My comment below addresses this question (`dns_config.allow_stale = true`): https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/pull/15890/files#r1063614178

> Some cloud providers offer extremely large instance sizes with Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) architectures.  Because the Go runtime is not NUMA aware, Consul is not NUMA aware.

Reviewer: is the recommendation to use not NUMA or is this more like a nice-to-know? @jkirschner-hashicorp 

```suggestion
Some cloud providers offer extremely large instance sizes with Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) architectures. Because the Go runtime is not NUMA aware, Consul is not NUMA aware.
```

Reviewer 3: I defer to @preetapan and @jmurret on this

Reviewer 2: @im2nguyen this is more a nice to know

> We strongly recommend utilizing the recommendations in the [DNS Caching tutorial](/consul/tutorials/networking/dns-caching) for stale consistency. Consul uses [stale consistency mode](/consul/api-docs/features/consistency#stale) to optimize for performance over consistency in DNS API responses.
> 
> If you need to improve consistency at the expense of an increased workload, you can set `dns_config.allow_stale` to `default`. In addition, you can configure TTLs for services and nodes to improve DNS resolving at the client and avoid server round trips.
> 
> We also recommend that you do not configure [`dns_config.max_stale` to limit the staleness of DNS responses](/consul/api-docs/features/consistency#limiting-staleness-advanced-usage), as it may result in a prolonged outage if your Consul servers become overloaded. If bounded result consistency is required by a service, consider modifying the service to use consistent service discovery HTTP API queries instead of DNS lookups.
> 
> Avoid using [`dns_config.use_cache`](/consul/docs/agent/config/config-files#dns_use_cache) when operating Consul at scale. The agent cache allocates memory for each requested route and each allocation can live up to 3 days, resulting in severe memory issues.

Reviewer 3: @boruszak : I made some suggestions to improve clarity and accuracy. Let me know what you think.

```suggestion
We strongly recommend using Consul's default behavior of [stale consistency mode for DNS lookups](/consul/api-docs/features/consistency#consul-dns-queries) to optimize for performance over consistency. Ensure `dns_config.allow_stale` is set to its default value of `true`.

We also recommend that you do not configure [`dns_config.max_stale` to limit the staleness of DNS responses](/consul/api-docs/features/consistency#limiting-staleness-advanced-usage), as it may result in a prolonged outage if your Consul servers become overloaded. If bounded result consistency is required by a service, consider modifying the service to use consistent service discovery HTTP API queries instead of DNS lookups.

Avoid using [`dns_config.use_cache`](/consul/docs/agent/config/config-files#dns_use_cache) when operating Consul at scale. The Consul agent cache allocates memory for each requested route and each allocation can live up to 3 days, resulting in severe memory issues. To implement DNS caching, we instead recommend that you [configure TTLs for services and nodes](/consul/tutorials/networking/dns-caching#ttl) to enable the DNS client to cache responses from Consul.
```

Refer to [Consul agent telemetry](/consul/docs/agent/telemetry#bolt-db-performance) for more information on agent metrics and how to use them.

#### Raft database size

Raft writes logs to BoltDB, which is designed as a single grow-only file. As a result, if you add 1GB of log entries and then you take a snapshot, only a small number of recent log entries may appear in the file. However, the actual file on disk never shrinks smaller than the 1GB size it grew.  

If you need to reclaim disk space, use the `bbolt` CLI to copy the data to a new database and repoint to the new database in the process. However, be aware that the `bbolt compact` command requires the database to be offline while being pointed to the new database.

In many cases disk space is not a primary concern because Raft logs rarely grow larger than a small number of GiB, even in large clusters. However, an inflated file with lots of free space significantly degrades write performance overall due to _freelist management_.

> After they are written to disk, Raft logs are eventually captured in a snapshot and log nodes are removed from BoltDB. BoltDB keeps track of the pages for the removed nodes in its freelist.  BoltDB also writes this freelist to disk every time there is a Raft write. When the Raft log grows large quickly and then gets truncated, the size of the freelist can become very large. In the worst case reported to us, the freelist was over 10MB. When this large freelist is written to disk on every Raft commit, the result is a large write amplification for what should be a small Raft commit.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After they are written to disk, Raft logs are eventually captured in a snapshot and log nodes are removed from BoltDB. BoltDB keeps track of the pages for the removed nodes in its freelist. BoltDB also writes this freelist to disk every time there is a Raft write. When the Raft log grows large quickly and then gets truncated, the size of the freelist can become very large. In the worst case reported to us, the freelist was over 10MB. When this large freelist is written to disk on every Raft commit, the result is a large write amplification for what should be a small Raft commit.  
```

- If these metrics are too close, increase the number of Raft trailing logs, which increases `consul.raft.leader.oldestLogAge`. Do not set the Raft trailing logs higher than necessary, as it can negatively affect write throughput and latency.

For more information, refer to [Raft Replication Capacity Issues](h/consul/docs/agent/telemetry#raft-replication-capacity-issues).

## Performance considerations for specific use cases

This section provides configuration and monitoring recommendations for Consul deployments according to the features you prioritize and their use cases.

### Service discovery

To optimize performance for service discovery, we recommend deploying multiple small clusters with consistent numbers of service instances and watches.

Several factors influence Consul performance at scale when used primarily for its service discovery and health check features. The factors you have control over include: 

- The overall number of registered service instances
- The use of [stale reads](/consul/api-docs/features/consistency#consul-dns-queries) for DNS queries

> - Max number of service instances for a given service  - Are there services that are registered in every node or in a large percentage of nodes in the fleet?  

Reviewer 3: I don't recall who added this consideration, but I don't _think_ it was me. We may have to follow up with that person to figure out the answer to your question.

> - Max number of service instances for a given service  - Are there services that are registered in every node or in a large percentage of nodes in the fleet?  

Reviewer 3: @jmurret : Do you know who might know the answer to Jeff's question?

> - Max number of service instances for a given service  - Are there services that are registered in every node or in a large percentage of nodes in the fleet?  

Reviewer 3: I think it's a bad idea to include something that we can't answer ourselves. It raises more questions for the audience (and us) than it answers.

If this were originally written in markdown in Git, we'd have an easy way to find out who wrote this line :) But because it was written in Google docs, I'm not sure how to track down who wrote this.

I think we should either:
- Figure out who originally wrote this (and what it means), OR
- Remove it, with the understanding that we can update the doc later to include this if necessary

> - Max number of service instances for a given service  - Are there services that are registered in every node or in a large percentage of nodes in the fleet?  

Reviewer 3: @preetapan : Do you happen to know who wrote this line or what it's referring to? Neither John nor I remember writing it, and we're unable to personally provide clarification here.

> - Max number of service instances for a given service  - Are there services that are registered in every node or in a large percentage of nodes in the fleet?  

Reviewer 3: @preetapan : Connecting your reply back to Jeff's original questions:

> My unresolved question: What specifically is influencing performance? Is it too many instances registered for a given service, or the dispersal of instances for a single service across nodes?

If I understand correctly, this third bullet is not about performance impacts on the Consul server nodes, but instead on the client/dataplane nodes hosting the workloads?

Let's say I have 100 instances of service `foo` on 100 nodes. One instance of that service has a health check that moves from `passing` to `warning`. Does that mean every node with a service `foo` is affected by that update to 1 service instance?

If there are no client agents, only dataplane agents, does the max number of service instances for a given service still matter? (i.e., Do I need to consider it in the specifications for my Consul server nodes?)

> - Max number of service instances for a given service  - Are there services that are registered in every node or in a large percentage of nodes in the fleet?  

Reviewer 4: > Does that mean every node with a service foo is affected by that update to 1 service instance?

Any entity that is monitoring the catalog for changes to this service will receive an update from the servers about state changes related to registered instances. The entity could a Consul agent, the data plane component, an API client, etc. Regardless of the type, the receiving entity will need to process that state change and reconcile it with the previously known data for the service. There's a computational cost associated with this.

> Do I need to consider it in the specifications for my Consul server nodes?

I think so. It's also important to consider how these update are being dispersed to consumers of the catalog info. AFAIK, it's computationally more expensive to distribute these updates to an HTTP API consumer a part of blocking query response as opposed to disseminating the information over Consul's streaming [g]RPC system, or xDS.

> - Max number of service instances for a given service  - Are there services that are registered in every node or in a large percentage of nodes in the fleet?  

Reviewer: would the following suggestion be accurate?

```suggestion
- The number of entities that are monitoring Consul (for example: Consul agent, data plane component, API client, etc...) for changes for a service. When the Consul server sends updates about a service's state, the receiving entity needs to process the state change and reconcile it with the previously known data for the service. 
```

> - Max number of service instances for a given service  - Are there services that are registered in every node or in a large percentage of nodes in the fleet?  

Reviewer 3: nit: I'd use "dataplane" rather than "data plane", since that's how we refer to the `consul-dataplane` component elsewhere.

Slightly altered wording. I'll let @blake make the final call on accuracy.

```suggestion
- The number of entities that are monitoring Consul, such as Consul client agents or dataplane components, for changes in a service's instances including registration and health status. When any service change occurs, all those entities incur a computational cost because they must process the state change and reconcile it with previously known data for the service.
```

> - Max number of service instances for a given service  - Are there services that are registered in every node or in a large percentage of nodes in the fleet?  

Reviewer 2: my feedback on the above is that its technically acccurate but now has lost the original point about the "fanout" factor i.e number of unique instances of the service. How about this? 

-The number of instances that a specific service has across your fleet manifests as additional computational load. This is proportional to the the number of entities that are monitoring Consul, such as Consul client agents or dataplane components. When any change occurs in a service's state, all those entities incur a computational cost because they must process the state change and reconcile it with previously known data for the service.
